>> Ifill: THE SENATE REJECTED A
BIPARTISAN PROPOSAL TO IMPOSE
BACKGROUND CHECKS ON SOME GUN
BUYERS, DEALING A BLOW TO THE
WHITE HOUSE AND TO GUN CONTROL
ADVOCATES.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT:
WE GET REACTION TO TODAY'S VOTE
AND WHAT IT MEANS FOR THE FUTURE
OF GUN LEGISLATION.
>> Ifill: THEN, CONFLICTING
REPORTS CAUSED CONFUSION OVER
THE STATUS OF THE INVESTIGATION
INTO THE BOSTON BOMBINGS.
WE HAVE THE LATEST ON WHAT'S
KNOWN AND WHAT'S NOT.
>> Brown: LETTERS SENT TO THE
PRESIDENT AND MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS WERE BELIEVED TO
NTAICON THE POISON, RICIN.
TODD ZWILLICH OF WNYC REPORTS ON
THE SUSPICIOUS PACKAGES.
>> Ifill: AND BRITAIN'S FIRST
FEMALE PRIME MINISTER IS BURIED.
IN LONDON, THOUSANDS TURN OUT
TO WISH MARGARET THATCHER A FOND
FAWELLRE, OTHERS TO BID HER GOOD
RIDDANCE.
>> Brown: MARCIA COYLE HAS
ANALYSIS OF TODAY'S UNANIMOUS
RULING FROM THE SUPREME COURT
THAT BLOCKS HUMAN RIGHTS CASES
ABROAD FROM BEING TRIED IN THE
U.S.
>> Ifill: AND JUDY WOODRUFF
TALKS TO THE AUTHOR OF THE NEW
BOOK "CLEAN," ABOUT HIS DEEP
DIVE INTO THE MYTHS AND
REALITIES OF DRUG ADDICTION.
>> IT'S SEEN AS A CHOICE: "IF
YOU'RE HAVING PROBLEMS IN YOUR
LIFE BECAUSE YOU'RE USING DRUGS
OR YOU'RE DRINKING, STOP."
WELL, PEOPLE WHO ARE ADDICTED
WOULD STOP, IF THEY COULD.
>> Ifill: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
>> Brown: THE CAMPAIGN FOR NEW
CURBS ON GUNS RAN INTO SENATE
OPPOSITION TODAY THAT IT COULD
NOT OVERCOME.
41 REPUBLICANS JOINED WITH FIVE
DEMOCRATS TO KILL THE PROPOSAL
THAT WAS THOUGHT TO HAVE THE
BEST CHANCE OF PASSING.
"NEWSHOUR" CONGRESSIONAL
CORRESPONDENT KWAME HOLMAN
BEGINS OUR COVERAGE.
>> THIS BILL PROTECTS HONEST,
GUN-LOVING, LAW-ABIDING CITIZENS
MORE THAN ANY PIECE OF
LEGISLATION WE'VE HAD IN THE
LAST TWO TO THREE DECADES.
AND I THINK THAT PEOPLE WHO'VE
READ THE BILL KNOW THAT.
>> Reporter: WEST VIRGINIA
DEMOCRAT JOE MANCHIN MADE A
FINAL, IMPASSIONED PLEA WITH HIS
SENATE COLLEAGUES TO SUPPORT
EXPANDED BACKGROUND CHECKS TO
WOULD-BE GUN BUYERS AT GUN SHOWS
AND ONLINE.
>> I UNDERSTAND THAT SOME OF OUR
COLLEAGUES BELIEVE THAT
SUPPORTING THIS PIECE OF
LEGISLATION IS RISKY POLITICS.
I THINK THERE'S A TIME IN OUR
LIFE THAT'S A DEFINING TIME IN
PUBLIC SERVICE.
A TIME WHEN YOU HAVE THE ABILITY
TO STAND WHEN YOU KNOW THE FACTS
ARE ON YOUR SIDE AND WALK INTO
THE LION'S DEN, AND LOOK THAT
LION IN THE EYE, AND TELL THAT
LION, "LISTEN, NOT TODAY, NOT
TODAY."
>> Reporter: THE PROPOSAL ON
BACKGROUND CHECKS WAS PUT
FORWARD BY MANCHIN AND
PENNSYLVANIA REPUBLICAN PAT
TOOMEY.
IT HEADLINED A LIST OF NINE
AMENDMENTS TO A BROADER GUN
CONTROL MEASURE, BEING VOTED ON
TODAY.
THEY INCLUDED PROVISIONS OFFERED
BY DEMOCRATS TO BAN ASSAULT
WEAPONS AND HIGH-CAPACITY
AMMUNITION MAGAZINES.
AND A REPUBLICAN-SPONSORED
MEASURE THAT SAYS STATES MUST
HONOR CONCEALED FIREARM PERMITS
FROM OTHER STATES.
THAT AMENDMENT WAS AUTHORED BY
TEXAS SENATOR JOHN CORNYN.
>> A CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE
IS LIKE A BACKGROUND CHECK ON
STEROIDS.
IT'S FAR MORE INTRUSIVE INTO THE
PRIVACY AND THE BACKGROUND OF A
PERSON WHO APPLIES FOR A HANDGUN
LICENSE.
THIS STANDARD OUGHT TO BE ONE
THAT THOSE WHO SUPPORT A ROBUST
BACKGROUND CHECK REGIME COULD
ALSO SUPPORT.
>> Reporter: CALIFORNIA DEMOCRAT
DIANNE FEINSTEIN, MEANWHILE,
SPOKE IN FAVOR OF THE ASSAULT
WEAPONS BAN SHE INTRODUCED.
>> I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT OUR
VALUES ARE STRONGER BECAUSE WE
ALLOW INDIVIDUALS TO OWN WEAPONS
DESIGNED FOR THE SOLE PURPOSE OF
KILLING AS MANY PEOPLE AS
POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: BUT SOUTH CAROLINA
REPUBLICAN LINDSEY GRAHAM SAID
THE MEASURES BEING TOUTED BY
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND MOST
DEMOCRATS WOULD DO LITTLE TO
REDUCE GUN VIOLENCE.
>> THE PRESIDENT WANTED THREE
THINGS DONE.
HE WANTED TO BAN ASSAULT
WEAPONS.
HE WANTED TO LIMIT MAGAZINE
SIZES.
AND HE WANTED TO IMPOSE A
UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND CHECK.
WELL ALL THREE OF THOSE CONCEPTS
ARE GOING TO BE ON THE FLOOR OF
THE UNITED STATES SENATE FOR A
VOTE, AND THEY'RE ALL GOING TO
LOSE.
WHY?
BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT THE SOLUTION
TO THE PROBLEM WE ALL FACE.
>> ON THIS VOTE THE YEAS ARE 54,
THE NAYS ARE 46.
>> Reporter: IN THE END, AS VICE
PRESIDENT BIDEN PRESIDED, THE
BACKGROUND CHECK AMENDMENT
FAILED TO CLEAR THE 60-VOTE
THRESHOLD NEEDED TO PASS.
THE CONCEALED FIREARM MEASURE
AND THE BAN ON ASSAULT WEAPONS.
ALSO FAILED.
BUT LATE IN THE DAY, SENATE
DEMOCRATS-- JOINED BY FAMILY
MEMBERS OF VICTIMS OF GUN
VIOLENCE-- PLEDGED TO KEEP UP
THE FIGHT.
>> I WANT EVERYONE TO UNDERSTAND
THIS IS JUST THE BEGINNING NOT
THE END.
THE FORCES SO OBSESSED WITH
DEFEATING ANY COMMONSENSE
REFORMS WHATSOEVER, THEY LOST
SI OF TEBIG PICTURE.
>> Reporter: AND PRESIDENT OBAMA
SPOKE MINUTES LATER FROM THE
WHITE HOUSE ROSE GARDEN.
>> NO SINGLE PIECE OF
LEGISLATION CAN STOP EVER ACT OF
VIOLENCE AND EVIL.
WE LEARNED THAT TRAGICALLY JUST
TWO DAYS AGO.
BUT IF ACTION BY CONGRESS COULD
HSA PERSON, ONE
CHILD, A FEW HUNDRED, A FEW
THOUSAND, IF IT COULD HAVE
PREVENTED THOSE PEOPLE FROM
LOSING THEIR LIVES TO GUN
VIOLENCE IN THE FUTURE, WHILE
PRESERVING OUR SECOND AMENDMENT
RIGHTS, WE HAD AN OBLIGATION TO
TRY.
AND THIS LEGISLATION MET THAT
TEST.
AND TOO MANY SENATORS FAILED
THEIRS.
>> Reporter: THIS WAS JUST THE
FIRST DAY OF VOTING.
BUT AFTER THE STRING OF DEFEATS
FOR GUN CONTROL ADVOCATES, THE
FATE OF THE OVERALL BILL WAS
UNCLEAR.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE ON WHAT LED
UP TO THE SENATE ACTION, WE TURN
TO TWO VOICES.
LAWRENCE KEANE IS  SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT AND GENERAL COUNSEL
FOR THE NATIONAL SHOOTING SPORTS
FOUNDATION, THE TRADE
ASSOCIATION FOR THE FIREARMS
INDUSTRY.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
WE HAD THOUGHT-- WE HAD HEARD
FROM THIS BIPARTISAN AGREEMENT
THAT JOE MANCHIN AND PAT TOOMEY,
THE DEMOCRATIC AND THE
REPUBLICAN CAME UP WITH ON
BACKGROUND CHECKS, THAT THIS WAS
FINALLY THE GRAND BARGAIN.
BUT IT WASN'T.
WHAT HAPPENED TO THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT THERE WAS
NEVER REALLY ENOUGH VOTES, AS WE
SAW TODAY, TO PASS THEIR
PROPOSAL, AND, YOU KNOW, WE
BELIEVE SENATOR MANCHIN'S
INTENTIONS WERE HONEST AND HE'S
NOT TRYING TO INFRINGE UPON
SECOND AMENDMENT RIGHTS OR
ASKING LIKE THAT.
THE PROBLEM WE HAD FROM THE
INDUSTRY'S POINT OF VIEW WITH
THE LEGISLATION, THE BILL
PRIORITIZED BACKGROUND CHECKS
FOR GUN SHOWS OVER THOSE TAKING
PLACE AT STOREFRONT RETAILERS,
AND THAT JUST WOULDN'T WORK FOR
OUR MEMBERS.
WE REPRESENT THOUSANDS AND
THOUSANDS OF FIREARM RETAILERS,
AND SO WE THOUGHT THAT WAS A
PROBLEM.
AND IT ACTUALLY WAS WORSE THAN
THAT, BECAUSE THE WAY THE
LANGUAGE WAS DRAFTED, IT WOULD
REQUIRE ALL BACKGROUND CHECKS AT
GUN SHOWS HAD TO BE COMPLETED
BEFORE YOU COULD DO A BACKGROUND
CHECK FROM A STOREFRONT
F.F.L. DEALER.
SO THAT WOULD SHUT DOWN
BACKGROUND CHECKS ON WEEKENDS
FOR STOREFRONT DEALERS.
THAT IS UNACCEPTABLE FOR OUR
DEALERS.
>> Ifill: YOU HEARD SENATOR
GRAHAM, THAT THE PRESIDENT
PUSHED FOR THREE THINGS,
BACKGROUND CHECKS, ASSAULT
WEAPON--
>> BANNING--
>> Ifill: MAGAZINES.
>> AND UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND
CHECKS, CORRECT.
>> Ifill: YOU WON ON ALL THREE
OF THOSE GROUNDS, AND WHY?
IS THERE ANY SORT OF GUN CONTROL
EFFORT YOU WOULD SUPPORT?
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
THAT-- WE OPPOSE BANS ON MODERN
SPORTING RIFLES, THE MOST
POPULAR RIFLES BEING SOLD IN THE
UNITED STATES TODAY.
ROUGHLY HALF THE PEOPLE THAT BUY
THEM ARE CURRENT OR FORMER
MEMBERS OF THE MILITARY OR LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
THEY BUY THEM FOR LEGITIMATE
PURPOSES-- PRIMARILY FOR TARGET
SHOOTING AND INCREASINGLY TO GO
HUNTING.
MEMBERS OF THE UNITED STATES
SENATE AND CONGRESS OWN THOSE
FIREARMS.
PAUL RYAN, FOR EXAMPLE, OWNS ONE
OF THOSE AND GOES HUNTING WITH
THEM.
>> Ifill: THAT ONE WAS A
FORGONE CONCLIEWRKZ AS WERE THE
MAGAZINE CLIPS, BUT THE
BACKGROUND CHECKS NOT SO MUCH.
>> OUR CONCERN WITH THE
UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND CHECKS IS
WE THINK THE PROBLEM WE SEE IS
YOU HAVE TO FIX THE NIX SYSTEM.
THE FIRST THING YOU NEED TO DO
IS FIX THE NIX SYSTEM WHICH IS
WHY OUR INDUSTRY IS FUNDING AN
INITIATE TOIF WORK AT THE
GRASS-ROOTS LEVEL TO WORK WITH
THE STATES FALLING DOWN ON THE
JOBS AND NOT GETTING THE
BACKGROUND CHECKS-- GETTING THE
INFORMATION INTO THE BACKGROUND
CHECK SYSTEM.
THE SYSTEM IS ONLY AS GOOD AS
THE INFORMATION THAT'S IN IT,
AND BACKGROUND CHECKS THAT ARE
INCOMPLETED AND ACCURATE DON'T
HELP ANYBODY.
HAVING MORE OF THOSE BACKGROUND
CHECKS THAT ARE INCOMPLETE ALSO
DOESN'T HELP ANYBODY.
>> Ifill: AS FAR AS YOU'RE
CONCERNED EVEN THOUGH THE
PRESIDENT-- OR HARRY REID SAID,
THIS IS ROUND ONE-- BOTH OF THEM
SAID IT-- YOU THINK FOR THE
FEDERAL LEVEL THIS ARGUMENT IS
OVER.
>> NO, I DON'T THINK SO AT ALL.
I MET WITH SENATOR REID TODAY
AND SENATOR MANCHIN, AND WE
BELIEVE THE DISCUSSION IS NOT
OVER, AND WE DON'T BELIEVE THE
DISCUSSION SHOULD BE OVER.
THE DIALOGUE SHOULD CONTINUE.
LOOK, WE ALL SHARE THE GOAL OF
WANTING TO MAKE OUR COMMUNITIES
SAFER BUT REASONABLE MIND CAN
AND DO DISAGREE ABOUT HOW BEST
TO ACHIEVE THAT.
WE DON'T AGREE WITH BANNING
FIREARMS OR BANNING MAGAZINES OR
HAVING SO-CALLED UNIVERSAL
BACKGROUND CHECKS, WHICH ARE
OPPOSED BY 86% OF THE FIREARMS
RETAILERS IN THE UNITED STATES.
AND THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSALS
ARE ALSO NOT SUPPORTED BY THE
MEN AND WOMEN IN LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
OVER 85% OF THE MEN AND WOMEN IN
LAW ENFORCEMENT DO NOT SUPPORT
THE PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL.
>> Ifill: BUT THE PRESIDENT
SAYS 90% OF AMERICANS SUPPORT
IT.
>> I THINK YOU-- I DON'T KNOW
THAT THEY UNDERSTAND EXACTLY
WHAT IS MEANT BY UNIVERSAL
BACKGROUND CHECKS.
FROM OUR POINT OF VIEW, FROM THE
INDUSTRY'S POINT OF VIEW, THE
PROBLEM IS YOU HAVE TO FIX THE
NIX SYSTEM FIRST.
WE LIKE SOME OF THE PROVISIONS,
AND WE TOLD SENATOR MARCH AND I
KNOW SENATOR TOOMEY, WE LIKE
SOME OF THE PROVISIONS THAT WERE
IN HIS AMENDMENT.
SIMILAR PROVISIONS WERE IN
SENATOR GRASSLEY'S PROPOSAL.
WE SUPPORTED SENATOR GRASSILY'S
PROPOSAL.
WE THINK THERE CAN BE COMMON
GROUND ON THINGS LIKE FIX, NIX,
AND GETTING RECORDS INTO THE
SAND PROVIDING RESOURCES FOR
MENTAL HEALTH THAT WE THINK THAT
THE COMMON DENOMINATOR IN A
NUMBER OF THESE RECENT
HIGH-PROFILE SHOOTINGS IS THE
MENTAL HEALTH OF THE SHOOTER.
AND THEY'RE NOT GETTING THE
TREATMENT THEY NEEDED.
THEY'RE NOT IN THE SYSTEM.
OR IF THEY'RE THE SYSTEM, THE
RECORDS AREN'T SHOWING UP IN THE
BACKGROUND CHECKS.
>> Ifill: ONE OF THE DEMOCRATS
WHO VOTED AGAINST THE BAEK
CHECKS, SENATOR MAX BAUCUS, WAS
ASKED WHY DID YOU VOTE AGAIN IS,
AND HE SAID MONTANA, HIS HOME
STATE AIR, VERY RED STATE, AND
THE PRESIDENT SAID THIS WAS ALL
ABOUT POLITICS.
HOW MUCH OF THIS WAS ABOUT THE
CONTENT OF THIS SLAIRKZ HOW MUCH
WAS ABOUT PURE POLITICS?
YOU CAN'T DO IT AND GO HOME AND
GET RE-ELECTED.
>> LOOK IT'S WASHINGTON.
POLITICS IS ALWAYS PART OF THE
DISCUSSION.
BUT FOR THE INDUSTRY IT'S ABOUT
THE POLICY.
WE THINK THE FOCUS NEEDS TO BE
ON FIXING NIX, IT'S PART OF OUR
INITIATIVE, AND WE THINK THE
OTHER PART OF IT IS WE NEED TO
ADDRESS THE MENTAL HEALTH
PROBLEMS IN OUR COUNTRY.
THAT'S ONE OF THE ISSUES THERE'S
COMMON GROUND OF, AND WE NEED TO
DO ENFORCEMENT OF THE LAW.
PART OF THE PROBLEM WE SEE THE
BACKGROUND CHECKS THAT OCCUR NOW
UNDER CURRENT LAW, THE PEOPLE
THAT FAIL IT AREN'T BEING
PROSECUTED.
IF YOU EXPAND TO SO-CALLED
UNIVERSAL BACKGROUND CHECKS, IF
YOU DON'T PROSECUTE THE PEOPLE
THAT FAIL THE BACKGROUND CHECKS
WHAT'S THE POINT GLAEN.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> NOW WE'RE JOINED BY SENATOR
RICHARD BLUMENTHAL A DEMOCRAT
FROM CONNECTICUT.
HE JOINS FRUS THE SENATE.
THERE WERE MEMBERS FROM NEWTOWN
IN THE GALLERY TODAY AS THIS
VOTE HAPPENED.
WHAT WAS THE REACTION?
>> TODAY WAS HEARTBREAKING FOR
ME, REALLY SAD AND SHOCKING, BUT
THE HARDEST PART WAS TO EXPLAIN
TO THE FAMILIES HOW 90% OF THE
AMERICANS COULD BE IN FAVOR OF
BACKGROUND CHECKS, AND THE
SENATE FAILED TO REACH THE
NECESSARY 60 VOTES.
AND THEIR REACTION WAS
ABSOLUTELY INSPIRING AS ONE OF
THEM SAID TO ME WHEN I SAID,
WE'RE COMING BACK."
SHE SAID TO ME, "IT'S NOT EVEN
CLOSE.
WE'RE COMING BACK.
NOT EVEN CLOSE."
>> Ifill: WHAT DOES THAT MEAN
"COMING BACK."
AFTER YOU FAILED TO GET THE 60
VOTES NECESSARY, ON NOT ONLY
THIS BUT ON A NUMBER OF OTHER
PIECE OF GUN CONTROL LEGISLATION
TODAY, WHAT DOES COMING BACK
LOOK LIKE?
>> COMING BACK LOOKS LIKE
PERSUADING COLLEAGUES THAT THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE NOT JUST IN
FAVOR OF BACKGROUND CHECKS,
ILLEGAL TRAFFICKING BANS, AND
STRONGER SCHOOL SAFETY MEASURES,
ALONG WITH A BAN ON ASSAULT
WEAPONS AND HIGH-CAPACITY
MAGAZINES, BUT THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE ARE GOING TO HOLD THE
SENATE ACCOUNTABLE AND
ANSWERABLE BETWEEN NOW AND
ELECTION DAY, AND ON ELECTION
DAY.
SO I THINK THAT THE RESOLUTENESS
AND RESILIENCE OF THE FAMILIES
HAS TO BE SHOWN BY ELECTED
LEADERS HERE.
AND IF THEY SHOW AN OUNCE OF
COURAGE THAT THESE FAMILIES HAVE
SHOWN, THEY WILL VOTE FOR THESE
MEASURES THE NEXT TIME AROUND.
AND THE LEADER, MAJORITY LEADER
REID, HAS INDICATED THERE'S NO
QUESTION THAT WE'LL HAVE MORE
VOTES.
>> Ifill: SENATOR, YOU PULLED
OUT ALL THE STOPS THIS TIME.
WE SAW THE NEWTOWN FAMILIES
MAKING THE ROUNDS FACE TO FACE,
MEETING WITH SENATORS.
THE PRESIDENT CAME OUT NUMEROUS
TIME AND SHOWED HIS PASSION,
WENT TO CONNECTICUT, MET WITH
THE FAMILIES, BROUGHT THEM HERE
ON AIR FORCE ONE, AND YOU WERE
NOT ABLE TO PERSUADE ENOUGH OF
YOUR COLLEAGUES THIS TIME
AROUND.
WHAT WILL BE DIFFERENT?
>> GWEN FOUR MONTHS AGO THIS
ISSUE WAS THOUGHT TO BE
POLITICALLY UNTOUCHABLE, AND
JUST ABOUT A WEEK AGO THE GOAL
OF 60 VOTES TO CONTINUE THE
DEBATE WAS THOUGHT TO BE
UNREACHABLE.
THERE HAS BEEN A SEISMIC CHANGE
IN THE POLITICAL LANDSCAPE, AND
IT IS STILL CHANGING.
SO I THINK THERE IS THE REAL
POSSIBILITY THAT PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO BE LISTENING TO
CONSTITUENTS BACK HOME WHO WILL
LEARN FOR THE FIRST THYME A
MAJORITY OF VOTES IN THE SENATE
ISN'T GOOD ENOUGH TO GET ACTION.
AND THAT IS A FUNDAMENTAL
INDICTMENT OF OUR DEMOCRACY TO
SAY THAT 55 OR 54 VOTES IN THE
UNITED STATES SENATE TO SAVE
LIVES AND MAKE OUR NEIGHBORHOODS
SAFER AND KEEP FAITH WITH THE
FAMILIES OF NEWTOWN, AS WELL AS
THE 3400 OTHER VICTIMS OF GUN
VIOLENCE SINCE THEN, IS NOT
ENOUGH TO SEEK AND GET ACTION.
AND I WILL JUST SAY ONE OTHER
THING-- YOU KNOW, WHAT YOU'VE
JUST HEARD ABOUT IMPROVING THE
NIX SYSTEM IS ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
THERE IS COMMON GROUND HERE.
WE DO NEED TO IMPROVE THE AMOUNT
AND ACCURACY OF INFORMATION
GOING INTO THE NATIONAL INSTANT
CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK
SYSTEM.
IT'S THE LIFE BLOOD OF THE
BACKGROUND CHECKS THAT ARE USED
TO KEEP GUNS OUT OF THE HANDS OF
CRUS PEOPLE.
BUT WE CAN DO THAT AND IMPROVE
THE BACKGROUND CHECKS SO AS TO
COVER ALL FIREARM PURCHASES.
WE CAN HAVE MORE PROSECUTION.
I'M A FORMER PROSECUTOR.
I WAS THE UNITED STATES ATTORNEY
FOR FOUR AND A HALF YEARS IN
CONNECTICUT AND THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL OF OUR STATE FOR 20
YEARS.
SO I BELIEVE IN MORE
PROSECUTIONS.
>> Ifill: SENATOR, I GUESS I
UNDERSTAND WHAT YOU'RE SAYING.
BUT I'VE HEARD YOU SAY IT BEFORE
AND OTHERS SAY IT BEFORE.
I'M TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW THE
ARGUMENT OR THE DISPUTE HERE IS
ANY DIFFERENT THAN IT HAS BEEN
IN PAST YEARS WHEN YOU BROUGHT
GUN LEGISLATION TO THE FORE.
IT HASN'T-- IT'S BEEN ROLLED
BACK, AND THEN YOU'VE GONE BACK
TO YOUR CORNERS AND NOTHING ELSE
HAS HAPPENED.
THE PRESIDENT SEEMED FRUSTRATED
TODAY BUT I'M NOT QUITE CERTAIN
HOW YOU CHANGE MINDS.
>> THIS TIME WE'RE NOT GOING
BACK TO OUR CORNERS.
IF THAT'S HAPPENED IN THE PAST.
CERTAINLY WHAT YOU HEARD TODAY
FROM TWO OF THE HIGHEST LEADERS
IN OUR COUNTRY ARE A
RESOLUTENESS AND DETERMINATION
THAT PERHAPS HASN'T BEEN PRESENT
BEFORE, AND TRAGICALLY, GWEN, WE
WILL HAVE MORE KILLINGS.
WE WILL HAVE MORE MASS
SHOOTINGS.
THEY WILL RESULT FROM ASSAULT
WEAPONS.
AND FROM HIGH-CAPACITY
MAGAZINES.
BUT MOST IMPORTANT, THEY WILL
RESULT FROM CRIMINALS HAVING
THEIR HANDS ON THESE WEAPONS OF
WAR, NOT ONLY THE ASSAULT
WEAPONS BUT ALSO HANDGUNS AND
OTHER WEAPONS THAT HAVE TO BE
KEPT OUT OF THEIR HANDS.
>> Ifill: LET ME JUDGE ASK YOU
WHAT YOU JUST ASKED KEY FROM THE
SHOOTERS ASSOCIATION.
HOW MUCH OF THIS IS PURE
POLITICS.
>> THERE WERE PROFILES OF
COURAGE TODAY ON THE FLOOR OF
THE UNITED STATES SENATE.
THERE WERE ALSO SOME FOLKS WHO
MAYBE WERE A LITTLE BIT MORE
FEARFUL AND APPREHENSIVE THAN
THEY NEED TO BE BECAUSE THE
SPECIALISTS HERE HAVING McED TO
MOBILIZE A SMALL, INVESTMENT,
VOCAL PART POPULATION, SOME
CONCENTRATED IN SOME STATES.
BUT AT THE END OF THE DAY TTAKES
A MAJORITY TO WIN AN ELECTION,
AND I THINK THEY'RE GOING TO
HEAR FROM THE MAJORITY.
>> Ifill: SENATOR RICHARD
BLUMENTHAL OF CONNECTICUT, THANK
YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: STILL TO COME ON THE
"NEWSHOUR": THE LATEST FROM
BOSTON ON THE INVESTIGATION INTO
THE BOMBINGS; SUSPICIOUS
PACKAGES ARE SENT TO WASHINGTON;
PRAISE AND PROTEST FOR BRITAIN'S
"IRON LADY"; A UNANIMOUS
DECISION AT THE SUPREME COURT
AND A DEEPER LOOK AT ADDICTION.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARSREEI NIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: THE
INVESTIGATION INTO THE KILLINGS
OF A NORTH TEXAS DISTRICT
ATTORNEY, HIS WIFE AND AN
ASSISTANT PROSECUTOR TOOK A NEW
TURN TODAY.
AUTHORITIES SAID KIM WILLIAMS--
THE WIFE OF A FORMER JUSTICE OF
THE PEACE-- HAS BEEN CHARGED
WITH CAPITAL MURDER.
INVESTIGATORS HAD BEEN FOCUSING
ON HER HUSBAND-- ERIC WILLIAMS.
HE WAS ARRESTED SATURDAY FOR
MAKING THREATS.
THE MURDERED OFFICIALS
PROSECUTED WILLIAMS FOR COMPUTER
THEFT LAST YEAR.
HE WAS CONVICTED AND LOST HIS
ELECTED POSITION.
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT HAS SENT
DOWN NEW GUIDELINES FOR HANDLING
SUSPECTED DRUNKEN DRIVERS.
A DECISION TODAY SAID IN MOST
SUCH CASES, POLICE MUST TRY TORE
ORDERING BLOOD TESTS.
THAT'S ALREADY THE CASE IN ABOUT
HALF THE STATES.
THE STATE OF MISSOURI AND THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION WANTED A
BLANKET RULE ALLOWING THE BLOOD
TESTS WITHOUT A WARRANT.
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE IN
SOUTHWESTERN PAKISTAN WERE
HOMELESS TODAY-- 24 HOURS AFTER
A POWERFUL EARTHQUAKE ROCKED
NEIGHBORING IRAN.
AT LEAST 700 HOMES IN THE
MASHKEL AREA OF BALUCHISTAN
PROVINCE WERE REDUCED TO RUBBLE.
SOME 35 PAKISTANIS WERE KILLED
IN THE QUAKE, AND ANOTHER 150
WERE INJURED.
THE PAKISTANI ARMY SAID IT
DEPLOYED SEVERAL HUNDRED
SOLDIERS TO THE QUAKE ZONE TO
BRING MUCH-NEEDED HUMANITARIAN
RELIEF.
IN THE MIDDLE EAST, ISLAMIST
MILITANTS FIRED AT LEAST TWO
ROCKETS FROM EGYPT'S SINAI
PENINSULA INTO SOUTHERN ISRAEL,
ADDING TO GROWING SECURITY
CONCERNS THERE.
THEY TARGETED THE RESORT TOWN OF
EILAT.
BUT POLICE OFFICIALS SAID THERE
WERE NO CASUALTIES.
MEANWHILE, PALESTINIANS IN THE
WEST BANK AND GAZA MARKED
PRISONER DAY, URGING ISRAEL TO
RELEASE PALESTINIAN DETAINEES.
THEY WAVED FLAGS AND CARRIED
PICTURES OF SOME OF THE 4,500
PALESTINIANS IN CUSTODY.
NEW ZEALAND BECAME THE 13TH
COUNTRY IN THE WORLD TODAY --
AND THE FIRST IN THE ASIA-
PACIFIC REGION-- TO LEGALIZE
SAME SEX MARRIAGE.
LAWMAKERS VOTED 77 TO 44 IN
FAVOR OF THE MEASURE.
NEW ZEALAND HAS HAD CIVIL UNIONS
SINCE 2005, BUT THE NEW LAW WILL
ALLOW COUPLES TO ADOPT CHILDREN
AND HAVE THEIR MARRIAGES
RECOGNIZED BY OTHER COUNTRIES.
IT TAKES EFFECT IN LATE AUGUST.
ON WALL STREET, A NEW SELL-OFF
PUSHED STOCKS DOWN, AMID NEW
SIGNS OF ECONOMIC WEAKNESS IN
EUROPE AND LACKLTER USREPORTS
FROM BANK OF AMERICA AND APPLE.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 138 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
14,618.
THE NASDAQ FELL NEARLY 60 POINTS
TO CLOSE AT 3,204.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JEFF.
>> Brown: IN BOSTON TODAY,
CONFUSION ERUPTED OVER
CONFLICTING ACCOUNTS THAT
THERE'D BEEN A MAJOR BREAK IN
THE INVESTIGATION OF THE BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBINGS.
EARLY THIS AFTERNOON CROWDS
GATHERED OUTSIDE THE FEDERAL
COURTHOUSE IN SOUTH BOSTON, AMID
REPORTS THAT A SUSPECT HAD BEEN
IDENTIFIED BY SECURITY CAMERA
VIDEO, THEN ARRESTED AND EVEN
TAKEN TO COURT.
BUT THE F.B.I. SHOT DOWN CLAIMS
THAT ANYONE WAS IN CUSTODY,
AND IT ISSUED A STATEMENT THAT
SAID, IN PART:
THE BUREAU ALSO PUT OFF AN
AFTERNOON BRIEFING, CITING A
BOMB SCARE THAT FORCED EVERYBODY
OUT OF THE COURTHOUSE.
EARLIER, THE F.B.I. RELEASED
PHOTOS OF  REMNANTS OF THE BOMBS
MADE OUT OF PRESSURE COOKERS AND
THE BLACK NYLON BAGS THAT
CONCEALED THEM.
ONE OF THE PRESSURE COOKER LIDS
WAS CATAPULTED TO A NEARBY
ROOFTOP.
AND INVESTIGATORS KEPT SIFTING
THE CRIME SCENE FOR MORE CLUES
TODAY.
ALL THREE PEOPLE KILLED IN THE
BOMBINGS HAVE NOW BEEN
IDENTIFIED-- EIGHT-YEAR OLD
MARTIN RICHARD, 29-YEAR-OLD
KRYSTLE CAMPBELL AND LU LINGZI,
A CHINESE GRADUATE STUDENT AT
BOSTON UNIVERSITY.
LAST NIGHT, NEIGHBORS AND
FRIENDS OF  MARTIN RICHARD AND
HIS FAMILY HELD A CANDLELIGHT
VIGIL NEAR A BASEBALL DIAMOND
AND FIELD WHERE HE USED TO PLAY.
>> EVERYBODY KNOWS THEM,
EVERYBODY LOVES THEM.
IT'S JUST UNTHINKABLE, YOU KNOW,
ANYBODY'S LITTLE BOY, WAS OUR
LITTLE BOY.
>> Reporter: BOSTON COMMON WAS
THE SITE OF ANOTHER VIGIL LAST
NIGHT.
SEVERAL HUNDRED TURNED OUT TO
SING AND PAY TRIBUTE TO THOSE
KILLED, AND THE MORE THAN 170
INJURED.
>> BOSTONIANS AND PEOPLE WHO ARE
HERE ARE RESILIENT AND WE COME
TOGETHER IN THE HARDEST TIMES
AND THE BEST TIMES SO YOU KNOW
IT'S STILL GREAT TO BE A
BOSTONIAN.
>> Reporter: AND IN WASHINGTON
TODAY, SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY, WHO ALSO CALLS BOSTON
HOME, SPOKE EMOTIONALLY AT A
CONGRESSIONAL HEARING.
>> THE GRANDDAUGHTER OF A VERY,
VERY CLOSE SUPPORTER AND FRIEND
OF MINE THROUGH ALL MY POLITICAL
CAREER IS FIGHTING TO KEEP BOTH
OF HER LEGS.
BOSTON IS NOT GOING TO BE
INTIMIDATED BY THIS.
BUT WE'RE GOING TO FIND OUT WHO
DID THIS.
>> Reporter: MANY OF THE
INJURED, WHO WERE TREATED AT
AREA HOSPITALS, HAVE NOW BEEN
RELEASED.
BUT DOCTORS SAID A NUMBER ARE
FACING NEW SURGERIES AND OTHER
THREATS.
>> NOW WHAT WE'RE DOING IS
EVALUATING THEIR WOUNDS TO MAKE
SURE THAT THERE'S NOT ANY OTHER
PROCESSES GOING ON, INFECTION.
AND ALLOWING FOR THESE WOUNDS TO
HEAL AND THEN FOR THESE PATIENTS
TO HAVE THESE WOUNDS CLOSED AND
START THE REHABILITATION
PROCESS.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE,
MAKESHIFT MEMORIALS SPRANG UP AT
THE ENTRANCE OF THE STILL CLOSED
BOYLSTON STREET, WHERE THE
MARATHON HAD ITS FINISH LINE.
PEOPLE LEFT FLOWERS, FLAGS,
POSTERS AND RACE MEDALS.
AND THERE WERE MEMORIALS OF
ANOTHER KIND FROM RUNNERS.
>> I WAS TRYING TO RUN ALONG THE
RIVER, AND I FELT AN OBLIGATION
TO RUN ALONG THE BOUNDARY OF THE
POLICE CORDON.
I JUST FELT SOMETHING THAT IS
DRAWING RUNNERS TO RESPECT THE
PEOPLE THAT WERE HURT, TO
RESPECT THE PEOPLE IN THE RACE.
>> Reporter: ELSEWHERE, TENSIONS
REMAINED HIGH.
IN OKLAHOMA CITY, WHERE A TRUCK
BOMBING KILLED 168 PEOPLE IN
1995, BUILDINGS WERE EVACUATED
AFTER A U-HAUL TRUCK WAS PARKED
OUTSIDE CITY HALL.
IT TURNED OUT TO BE EMPTY.
AND WE'RE JOINED FROM BOSTON
ONCE AGAIN TONIGHT BY
DAVID BOERI, A REPORTER FOR
WBUR PUBLIC RADIO.
HE'S BEEN COVERING THE TURN OF
EVENTS ALL DAY.
DAVID, A VERY CONFUSING DAY.
WHAT IS THE LATEST ABOUT WHETHER
ANYONE IS NOW IN CUSTODY OR
IDENTIFIED AS A SUSPECT?
WHAT CAN YOU TELL US?
>> JEFF, AT THIS POINT BOTH THE
F.B.I. AND THE U.S. ATTORNEY
HERE IN BOSTON INSIST THERE HAVE
BEEN NO ARRESTS MADE.
NOBODY IS IN CUSTODY.
HOWEVER, THERE IS A LOT OF
CONFUSION REGARDING THIS.
AND REPORTS THAT WE'VE HAD
THROUGHOUT THE DAY.
>> Brown: SOME OF THESE
REPORTS INVOLVE IMAGES THAT WERE
CAUGHT OF SOMEBODY WITH THE BAG
THAT HAS NOW BEEN IDENTIFIED.
>> WE STARTED THE DAY WITH NEWS
REPORT THAT THE DETONATION FOR
THOSE PRESSURE COOKERS HAD BEEN
A TIMING DEVICE, THAT A CIRCUIT
BOARD HAS BEEN FOUND.
THERE WAS A TIMING DEVICE.
SO FAR, SO GOOD.
THEN WE STARTED TO GET REPORTS
INDEPENDENTLY THAT THERE HAD
BEEN IMAGES OF A MAN SEEN
PUTTING A DUFFLE BAG CLOSE TO
ONE OF THE AREAS WHERE THE
BOMBING TOOK PLACE, AND ALSO
THAT THERE WAS AN IMAGE, THERE
WAS GREAT SURVEILLANCE VIDEO
FROM A LORD & TAYLOR SHOP NEAR
THE AREA THAT HAD ALSO SHOWN
ACTIVITY.
THEM THAT LED TO REPORTS --
AGAIN, BY A NUMBER OF
INDEPENDENT SOURCES -- THAT
THERE HAD BEEN AN ARREST MADE.
SO THE F.B.I. AND THE U.S.
ATTORNEY'S OFFICE CAME IN,
KNOCKED THE STORY DOWN.
HOWEVER, I HAD GONE OVER TO THE
U.S. COURTHOUSE HERE, BEING TOLD
IN FACT THAT THERE WAS AN
ARREST, AND WHILE I WAS THERE, I
WAS TOLD BY TWO SENIOR JUDGES
AND TWO OTHER SENIOR OFFICIALS,
THAT IN FACT THEY HAD BEEN TOLD
TO PREPARE FOR SOMEBODY BEING
BROUGHT OVER IN CONNECTION TO
THE BOMBING.
A COURTROOM WAS BEING PREPARED,
AND THEY WERE EVEN PREPARING AN
OVERFLOW COURTROOM AT THE TIME.
THAT'S WHEN WE GOT A CODE RED
ALERT IN THE COURTHOUSE AND
EVACUATION TOOK PLACE, AN
EVACUATION BECAUSE A THREAT THAT
HAD BEEN-- THAT HAD BEEN MADE
THAT WAS DEEMED CREDIBLE AND THE
BUILDING WAS EVACUATED AT THAT
POINT.
AND BY THE WAY, THAT BUILDING
HAS THE U.S. ATTORNEY'S OFFICE
IN IT.
>> Brown: WELL, ALL OF THESE
REPORTS COMING OUT, RUMORS
SWIRLING, LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIALS ARE CLEARLY QUITE
UPSET WITH NEWS ORGANIZATIONS
FOR GETTING TOO FAR AHEAD OF
THINGS.
>> THAT'S TRUE.
WE WERE LECTURED BY THE F.B.I.
NARC HEADQUARTERS, AND ALSO THE
U.S. ATTORNEY'S OFFICE HERE SAID
WE DON'T KNOW WHERE THE STORY
CAME FROM.
AND YET I CAN TELL YOU AT THE
COURTHOUSE, TWO SENIOR JUDGES
AND TWO OTHER SENIOR OFFICIALS
TOLD ME THEY HAD BEEN TOLD
PREPARE, WE ARE BRINGING
SOMEBODY OVER.
I THINK, PERHAPS, WE CAN SAY
FROM THIS IT WOULD BE AN
INDICATION-- MAYBE THERE'S
NOBODY IN CUSTODY, MAYBE NO
ARRESTS HAVE BEEN MADE, BUT
PERHAPS WE ARE CLOSE TO SOME
REAL PROGRESS IN THIS CASE THAT
MIGHT INVOLVE AN ARREST.
THERE ARE NONE NOW.
THE PRESS CONFERENCE THAT THE
U.S. ATTORNEY HAD CALLED FOR
THIS AFTERNOON WAS POSTPONED.
WE DON'T KNOW WHEN IT AM TAKE
PLACE.
THE COURTHOUSE IS CLOSED.
THE PUBLIC WILL NOT BE ALLOWED
THERE TONIGHT.
SO IT WOULD NOT SEEM THINGS WILL
HAPPEN AT THE COURTHOUSE,
EITHER.
>> Brown: HEARING DIFFERENT
VERSION OR DIFFERENT REPORTS
COME OUT, IT IS CLEAR WHO IS IN
CHARGE.
IS THE F.B.I. IN CHARGE OF THIS?
>> THE F.B.I. IS SUPPOSED TO BE
IN CHARM OF THIS, BUT AS THAT
BOMB THREAT, THAT CODE RED ALERT
INDICATED, WITH THE U.S.
ATTORNEY'S OFFICE BEING FORCED
TO EVACUATE, THERE'S A LOT OF
TURMOIL HERE RIGHT NOW, A LOT OF
CONFUSION.
ONE WOULD THINK THEY'LL HAVE A
PRESS CONFERENCE SOON BECAUSE
THEY NEED TO ADDRESS SOME OF
THESE REPORTS THAT WERE MADE BY
A NUMBER OF INDEPENDENT SOURCES
THAT INDICATED THAT THEY HAD
SOMEBODY.
PERHAPS IT WASN'T AN ARREST.
PERHAPS NOBODY IN CUSTODY.
THERE'S THE POSSIBILITY THEY'RE
TALKING TO SOMEBODY VOLUNTARILY
AND MAY BE CLOSE TO SOMETHING.
>> Brown: THEY HAD CANCELED OR
AT LEAST POSTPONED THAT LATE
AFTERNOON NEWS CONFERENCE BUT
THEY MAY STILL TALK TONIGHT?
>> WE ARE WAITING FOR THEM.
THEY SAID IT WAS POSTPONED.
WELL, IF IT'S POSTPONED IT WILL
BE RESCHEDULED FOR TONIGHT BUT
IT HASN'T BEEN RESCHEDULED YET.
AT THE SAME TIME, JEFF, THERE'S
A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT OF WORK
BEING DONE ON THE IMAGES.
THEY HAVE A TERRIFIC AMOUNT OF
IMAGES RIGHT NOW, AND AS ONE
EXPERT-- AS ONE FORENSIC EXPERT
TOLD ME, BOSTON IS NOW THE MOST
PHOTOGRAPHED CRIME SCENE IN
HISTORY.
>> Brown: WELL, WE TALKED A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THIS YESTERDAY.
THEY, OF COURSE, LAW ENFORCEMENT
ASKING FOR THE PUBLIC TO HELP.
SO THESE IMAGES ARE COMING FROM
THE PUBLIC.
THEY'RE COMING FROM LOCAL
STORES.
WHERE?
GIVE US A SENSE?
>> THAT'S RIGHT, FROM BOARKTS
FROM INDIVIDUALS, FROM STORES,
FROM SURVEILLANCE CAMERAS.
IF I CAN GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE.
WHAT HAPPENED IN TWO YEARS AGO,
AFTER THE BRUINS BEAT THE
CANUCKS IN THE STANLEY CUP, FANS
RIOTED IN DOWNTOWN VANCOUVER.
THEY SET FIRES.
THEY OVERTURNED CARS.
THEY BROKE GLASS.
IT WAS A CHAOTIC MOMENT.
THE POLICE THERE PUT OUT A CALL
FOR PHOTOS AND VOOZ.
THEY OBTAINED 5,000 HOURS OF
VIDEO AND OVER 100,000 PHOTOS.
THEY THEN BROUGHT IN NATIONAL
EXPERTS.
THERE WERE 53 EXPERTS THAT
WORKED FULL TIME FOR THREE WEEKS
AND AT THE END OF THE TIME THEY
HAD IDENTIFIED 15,000 CRIMINAL
ACTS-- OF COURSE, THIS BEHAVIOR
IS EXPLICIT-- BUT 15,000
CRIMINAL ACTS.
THEY TAGGED THE INDIVIDUALS, AND
THEY MADE CHARGES, BROUGHT OVER
350 PEOPLE INTO COURT.
THIS IS FAR BIGGER, BUT IT'S AN
EXAMPLE OF WHAT YOU CAN DO WITH
PHOTOGRAPHS AND PHOTOGRAPHIC
ANALYSIS.
>> Brown: VERY BRIEFLY, DAVID.
YESTERDAY WE TALKED ABOUT THE
CRIME SCENE.
IS IT STILL AS LARGE AS IT WAS?
>> THE CRIME SCENE IS VERY
LARGE.
OF COURSE, THEY'RE WORKING IN
THAT CLOSE AREA WHERE THE TWO
BOMB BLAFTZ WERE.
FORTUNATELY, WE HAVE NOT HAD
REALLY BAD WEATHER.
RAIN ITS WAS EXPECTED LAST
NIGHT.
OFTEN RAIN IS CONSIDERED TO HAVE
RUINED A CRIME SEEN.
IT DIDN'T HAPPEN.
THEY STILL HAVE THE CRIME SCENE
RELATIVELY INTACT.
>> Brown: DAVID BOERI, WBUR,
THANK YOU VERY MUCH ONCE AGAIN.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Ifill: AND WE TURN NOW TO A
STORY ADDING TO WHAT WAS ALREADY
A TENSE DAY ON CAPITOL HILL.
HARI IS BACK WITH OUR LOOK.
>> Sreenivasan: IN WASHINGTON
AND AROUND THE COUNTRY
AUTHORITIES CHAD RESEPORTS OF
SUSPICIOUS LETTERS AND PACKAGES
TODAY.
AT THE U.S. CAPITOL, POLICE
BRIEFLY EVACUATED PARTS OF TWO
SENATE OFFICE BUILDINGS, BUT
THEY OFFERED LITTLE INFORMATION.
>> CAPITOL POLICE RESPONDED TO A
SUSPICIOUS ENVELOPE.
WE'RE NOW CONDUCTING AN
INVESTIGATION.
>> Sreenivasan: IN ALL, THERE
WERE THREE QUESTIONABLE
PACKAGES, INCLUDING ONE SENT TO
ALABAMA REPUBLICAN RICHARD
SHELBY.
AND AT THE WHITE HOUSE, THE
SECRET SERVICE INTERCEPTED A
LETTER.
>> THERE WAS A LETTER SENT TO,
ADDRESSED TO, THE PRESIDENT THAT
AT A OFFSITE MAIL FACILITY WAS
NOTICED TO HAVE CONTAINED A
SUSPICIOUS SUBSTANCE AND TESTS
WERE UNDERTAKEN.
>> Sreenivasan: NEW ACCOUNTS
SAID THE LETTER TESTED POSITIVE-
- INITIALLY-- FOR RICIN, A
DEADLY POISON.
SO DID A LETTER TO MISSISSIPPI
REPUBLICAN ROGER WICKER THAT
SURFACED YESTERDAY AT A SENATE
MAIL FACILITY IN MARYLAND.
BUT OFFICIALS CAUTIONED, INITIAL
TESTS ARE OFTEN WRONG, AND MORE
CONCLUSIVE TESTING WAINS
PROGRESS.
THE BUREAU DID SAY BOTH
ENVELOPES WERE POSTMARKED FROM
MEMPHIS, TENNESSEE AND CONTAINED
A MESSAGE THAT READ:
"TO SEE A WRONG AND NOT EXPOSE
IT, IS TO BECOME A SILENT
PARTNER TO ITS CONTINUANCE."
THEY WERE SIGNED:
"I AM K.C. AND I APPROVE THIS
MESSAGE."
MISSOURI SENATOR CLAIRE
McCASKILL SAID POLICE HAVE A
SUSPECT IN MIND, BUT SHE OFFERED
NO DETAILS.
IN PHOENIX, ARIZONA AND
SAGINAW, MICHIGAN, INVESTIGATORS
EXAMINED TWO MORE LETTERS
SENT TO LOCAL OFFICES OF
SENATORS JEFF FLAKE AND CARL
LEVIN.
FOR NOW, THOUGH, THE F.B.I. SAID
THERE IS NO EVIDENCE OF A
CONNECTION BETWEEN THE LETTERS
AND THE BOSTON BOMBINGS.
FOR MORE ON HOW THE
INVESTIGATION IS BEING VIEWED ON
CAPITOL HILL, WE ARE JOINED BY
TODD ZWILLICK.
HE'S WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT
FOR "THE TAKEAWAY" ON PUBLIC
RADIO INTERNATIONAL AND WNYC.
TODD, WHAT'S THE LATEST YOU'RE
LONG-RANGE FROM AUTHORITIES?
>> WELL, NOT MUCH BEYOND WHAT
YOU JUST DESCRIBED IN THE PIECE,
HARI.
I WILL SAY IT IS AN ODD DAY ON
CAPITOL HILL, BETWEEN QUESTIONS
COMING FROM THE BOSTON BOMBING,
SUSPICIOUS PACKAGES, LETTERS
BEING DELIVERED WE HAND TO
OFFICES INCLUDING SENATOR
SHELBY'S, A RICIN LETTER TOWARDS
THE WHITE HOUSE, AND ONE TO THE
CAPITOL MAIL HANDLING FACILITY
OUT OF WASHINGTON, D.C.  IT HAS
EVERYBODY ON EDGE, AND IN FACT,
PEOPLE IN THE NORMAL SORT OF
CONVERSATIONS AND NORMAL
EXECUTION TO THE NEWS AROUND
HERE HAVEN'T REALLY HAD A CHANCE
TO FOCUS DOWN ON ONE THING.
THE GUN VOTES ARE GOING ON, ON
THE FLOOR.
PEOPLE WANT TO KNOW WHAT'S THE
LATEST WITH THE RICIN LETTERS.
DOES ANYBODY KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT
BOSTON?
WILL BOSTON AFFECT THE DEBATE ON
GUNS OR IMMIGRATION?
IT'S BEEN THAT KIND OF DAY,
REALLY UNUSUAL AND A LITTLE
TENSE, I'M AFRAID.
>> Sreenivasan: TODD, EARLIER
IN THE PIECE, WE FOCUSED ON THE
GUN CONVERSATION.
SOME OF THE FAMILIES MEMBERS OF
THE NEWTOWN VICTIMS WERE ALSO IN
THE GALLERY WHILE ALL THIS WAS
HAPPENING, IS THAT RIGHT?
>> THEY WERE.
FAMILIES OF NEWTOWN, ALSO
AURORA, PHOENIX, FROM MANY OF
THE GUN TRAGEDIES THAT WE'VE HAD
IN THIS COUNTRY OVER THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS, AND MANY OF
THOSE FAMILIES, SEVERAL OF THEM,
I SHOULD SAY, OFF THE SENATE
FLOOR AFTER THE DEFEAT OF THE
MANCHIN-TOOMEY GUN AMENDMENTS
GREETED SENATOR MANCHIN, SENATOR
REID, THE MAMALALA JORT LEADER,
AND SENATOR SCHUMER AND OTHER
DEMOCRATS CAME AND GREETED THEM
IN THE DISTANCE, OFF THE
CAMERAS, PLEDGING NOT TO GIVE
UP.
IT WAS A PHOTO-OP, AND A PRETTY
SENSITIVE MOMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: A LOT OF
PEOPLE REMEMBER AFTERNOON 9/11,
THE STRETCH WHEN THE ANTHRAX
LETTERS WERE DELIVERED.
HOW HAS THE PROCESS CHANGED TO
TRY TO PROTECT POOEM?
>> YOU'RE SEEING THAT WITH THESE
REPORTS WILL OF THE LETTER TO
SENATOR WICKER AND ALSO WITH
CERTAIN THINGS WITH SHELBY.
AFTER 9/11, MAIL HANDLING ON THE
HILL WAS MOVED WAY OFF THE HILL.
THERE WAS A MAIL SCREENING AND
HANDLING FACILITY IN PRINCE
GEORGES COUNTY, IN MARYLAND,
OVER WANT DISTRICT LINE, FAR,
FAR AWAY, SEVERAL MILES AWAY
FROM THE CAPITAL.
IT WAS THERE WHERE THE LETTER
CONTAINING-- WHICH WOUND UP
CONTAINING RICIN POWDER WAS
DISCOVERED AND TESTED.
THAT FACILITY WAS SHUT DOWN.
THOSE MAIL HANDLERS NOTIFIED THE
CAPITOL POLICE, WHO IN TURN
NOTIFIED THE SENATORS AND
EVENTUALLY THE MEDIA.
THOSE ARE THE PRECAUTION PRECAUT
WERE TAKEN AFTER THE ANTHRAX
ATTACKS.
THERE WAS A RICIN ATTACK ALSO IN
2004 WHERE AN ENVELOPE WAS SENT
TO SENATOR BILL FRIST, AT THE
TIME THE MAJORITY LEADER, ALSO
CONTAINED RICIN POWDER.
YOU CANNOT SEND MAIL TO CAPITOL
HILL NOW WITHOUT IT BEING
PRESCREENED, WHETHER THAT'S A
PACKAGE, WHETHER THERE'S A
LETTER.
EVERYONE WHO WORKS AROUND HERE
KNOWS EVEN IF YOU WORK AROUND
HERE AND YOU WANT BEST BUY TO
SEND YOUR ORDER TO WORK, DON'T
DO IT.
IT WILL TAKE WEEKS BECAUSE OF
THE SCREENING.
ONE OF THE WOOSHTZ LETTER YOU
DESCRIBED THAT GAVE A SCARE
TODAY IN SENATOR SHELBY'S OFFICE
WASN'T THAT, AS I UNDERSTAND
TTHAT THE LETTER ITSELF WAS
SUSPICIOUS.
IT'S THAT IT WAS HANDED OFF IN
PERSON.
SOMEBODY WALKEDDED INTO THE
OFFICE, HANDED A LETTER TO A
RECEPTIONIST OR WHOEVER WAS AT
THE DESK.
THAT'S A VIOLATION OF PROTOCOL
BECAUSE IT'S NOT SCREEPPED.
THAT'S WHY IT WAS SUSPICIOUS.
IT WAS CLEARED RELATIVELY
QUICKLY BECAUSE THERE WAS NO
SUSPICIOUS POWDER OR ANYTHING
ELSE, BUT IT WAS ON THESE DAYS,
THIS COUPLE OF DAYS IN TENSION
TO HAND OFF A LETTER IN PERSON
THAT GETS AROUND THE SCREENING
PROCESS MADE PEOPLE STEP BACK A
BIT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT WAS
NOTICEABLE TODAY BESIDES THE
ANXIETY YOU ARE DESCRIBED?
HOW WERE THE STAFFERS YOU BUMPED
INTO ALL DAY?
>> I HAVE TO SAY THE STAFFERS
AROUND HERE TAKE THESE THINGS IN
STRIDE.
A LOT OF THE STAFFERS AND
JOURNALISTS WERE AROUND FOR THE
ANTHRAX ATTACKES, WHEN LETTERS
WERE OPENED IN OFFICERS, WHEN
PEOPLE WERE QUARANTINED, FORCED
OR ASKED TO TAKE ANTIBIOTICS,
HAZMAT TEAMS IN YELLOW SUITS
RUNNING AROUND.
THIS IS NOTHING LIKE THAT.
YES, IT MAKES PEOPLE A LITTLE
BIT TENSE, BUT THE REMOVAL OF
MAIL HANDLING OFF THE CAPITOL
HILL COMPLEX INTO MARYLAND I
THINK GIVES PEOPLE, AT LEAST
AROUND HERE, A MEASURE OF
SECURITY BECAUSE THANE IN THIS
CASE WHILE IT IS A THREAT ON
SENATOR WICKER'S OFFICE IN THIS
CASE, IT NEVER GOT TO THEM
PERSONALLY AND I THINKTHAT
MAKES PEOPLE FEEL BETTER.
>> Sreenivasan: TODD ZWILLICH
THERE PUBLIC RADIO
INTERNATIONAL, THANK YOU VERY
MUCH.
>> PLEASURE, HARI.
>> Ifill: IN LONDON TODAY, FINAL
GOODBYES WERE SAID AT MARGARET
THATCHER'S FUNERAL.
WE BEGIN WITH A REPORT FROM
GARRY GIBBON OF "INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS."
>> Reporter: 23 YEARS AFTER SHE
LEFT DOWNING STREET MARGARET
THATCHER PASSED ONE LAST TIME.
THE CROWDS THREE DEEP NEAR
PARLIAMENT, NOW FIVE DEEP AND
BREAKING INTO APPLAUSE.
AT ST. PAUL'S CATHEDRAL WORLD
LEADERS PAST AND PRESENT WERE
ARRIVING TO TAKE THEIR SEATS--
ISRAELI PRIME MINISTER BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU, FORMER U.S. VICE
PRESIDENT DICK CHENEY.
AT THE R.A.F. CHUCH ST. CLEMENT
DANES, THE COFFIN WAS PLACED ON
A GUN CARRIAGE-- THE STUFF OF
ROYAL FUNERALS GIVEN TO FEW
COMMONERS.
THE CROWDS WERE NOW SOMETIMES
TEN DEEP, SOME WIPING AWAY
TEARS.
IN AN ECHO OF THE STATE FUNERAL
THE QUEEN GRANTED WINSTON
CHURCHILL IN 1965, MARGARET
THATCHER'S COFFIN WAS CARRIED UP
THE STEPS TO ST. PAUL'S.
THE QUEEN AND PRINCE PHILIP SAT
ACROSS FROM THE THATCHER FAMILY.
THE FIRST READING WAS GIVEN BY
MARGARET THATCHER'S 19-YEAR-OLD
GRANDDAUGHTER WHO WAS BORN IN
AMERICA AND IS NOW A STUDENT
THERE.
>> STAND, THEREFORE, AND HAVING
ON THE BREAST PLATE OF
RIGHTEOUSNESS.
>> DAVI
>> Reporter: DAVID CAMERON WHO
SPENT HIS EARLY YEARS AS LEADER
TRYING TO DETACH HIMSELF FROM
MARGARET THATCHER'S IMAGE GAVE
THE SECOND LESSON.
>> LET NOT YOUR HEART BE
TROUBLED.
HE BELIEVED IN GOD, BELIEVE ALSO
IN ME.
>> Reporter: MARGARET THATCHER'S
FAVORITE HYMNS WERE SUNG.
THE DETAILS OF THIS MORNING
PLANNED WITH THE PALACE AND
DOWNING STREET IN HER SHE LOST
POWER.
AS THE COFFIN LEFT THE
CATHEDRAL, SOME OF HER
SUPPORTERS CHEERED.
48 YEARS SINCE SHE LAST ATTENDED
THE FUNERAL OF ONE OF HER PRIME
MINISTERS THE QUEEN STOOD AGAIN
ON THE SAME STEPS WHERE SHE SAID
GOODBYE TO WINSTON CHURCHILL.
SHE TALKED TO THE THATCHER
FAMILY BRIEFLY ON THE CATHEDRAL
STEPS.
IT MAY BE NO POLITICIAN EVER HAS
SEND OFF LIKE THIS AGAIN.
>> Brown: FOR SOME IN THE UNITED
KINGDOM, HOWEVER, MARGARET
THATCHER'S FUNERAL WAS CAUSE FOR
PROTEST.
>> WASTE OF MONEY, WASTE OF
MONEY.
>> Brown: SMALL GROUPS GATHERED
ALONG THE PROCESSION ROUTE IN
LONDON, CHANTING AND RAISING
PLACARDS, TO CRITICIZE THE
POLICIES OF THE FORMER PRIME
MINISTER AND COMPLAIN ABOUT THE
CT TFAHAT THE GOVERNMENT WAS
FOOTING THE BILL FOR AT LEAST
SOME OF THE FUNERAL.
>> I SAW A LEADER WHO COZIED UP
TO DICTATORS, WHO REFUSED TO
IMPLEMENT SANCTIONS AGAINST
APARTHEID ERA SOUTH AFRICA WHO
CAUSED ENORMOUS DIVISION WITHIN
OUR SOCIETY, MADE THE RICH
RICHER, THE POOR POORER.
I DON'T WANT HISTORY WRITTEN BY
CAMERON AND THE CONSERVATIVE
PARTY.
THERE'S A DIFFERENT STORY.
THERE'S A STORY WHERE SHE
DIVIDED THIS COUNTRY.
>> Brown: THE PROTESTS IN LONDON
WERE RELATIVELY PEACEFUL.
POLICE THERE MADE NO ARRESTS.
LARGER CONCENTRATIONS OF
THATCHER CRITICS GATHERED IN
MINING COMMUNITIES LIKE
YORKSHIRE, AND WERE MUCH MORE
VOCAL.
SOME WHO BLAME THATCHER FOR THE
COLLAPSE OF THE LOCAL MINING
INDUSTRY HELD A MOCK FUNERAL AND
BURNED AN EFFIGY OF THE
COUNTRY'S FIRST FEMALE LEADER.
>> Ifill: WE TURN NOW TO THE
SUPREME COURT, WHICH RULED TODAY
THAT FOREIGN NATIONALS CANNOT
SUE U.S. CORPORATIONS IN HUMAN
RIGHTS DISPUTES.
MARCIA COYLE OF THE "NATIONAL
LAW JOURNAL" JOINS ME WITH MORE.
START BY EXPLAINING THE
PARAMETERS OF THIS CASE.
WE TALKED ABOUT IT BRIEFLY SOME
TIME AGO.
>> THIS STARTED ACTUALRY IN
2002, 12 NIGERIAN NATIONALS
BROUGHT A LAWSUIT IN FEDERAL
COURT HERE IN THE UNITED STATES
AGAINST THREE OIL COMPANIES.
THEY CLAIMED THAT THE OIL
COMPANY HAD ENLISTED THE AID OF
THE NIGERIAN MILITARY TO
SUPPRESS OPPOSITION TO THE OIL
COMPANY'S DRILLING IN A REGION
IN NIGERIA CALLED THE
OGONI REGION.
AND THE MILITARY HAD USED
TORTURE, EXECUTIONS, AND
ARBITRARY DETENTIONS TO DO THAT.
AND THEY BROUGHT THEIR LAWSUIT
UNDER A 1789 FEDERAL LAW CALLED
THE ALIEN TORT STATUTE, PROBABLY
ONE OF THE OLDEST LAWS ON THE
BOOKS IN THE UNITED STATES.
IT WAS ENACTED BY THE FIRST
CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES.
>> Ifill: WHAT WAS THAT
DESIGNED TO DO?
>> WELL, IT'S-- THERE'S SOME
DEBATE AS TO REALLY WHAT ITS
PURPOSE WAS, BUT THE STATUTE IS
VERY SIMPLE.
IT HAS ONE SENTENCE THAT SAYS
FEDERAL COURTS HAVE JURISDICTION
WHEN ALIENS BRING CLAIMS FOR
BASICALLY INJURIES CAUSED BY
VIOLATIONS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW
OR TREATIES.
>> Ifill: THE COURT SAID TODAY
THAT DID NOT APPLY IN THIS CASE?
WAS THERE WAS A QUESTION OF
WHETHER IT WAS A HUMAN RIGHTS
DISPUTE OR A JURISDICTIONAL ONE.
>> IT IS A HUMAN RIGHTS SUIT,
BUT IT ALSO INVOLVED
INTERPRETATION OF THE STATUTE.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE APPLIED THE A
CANON OF STATUTORY
INTERPRETATION JUDGE-MADE
DOCTRINE KNOWN AS A PRESUMPTION
AGAINST EXTRA-TERRITORIALITY.
WHAT CHA MEANS IS WHEN THE COURT
LOOKS AT A STATUTE, AND SAYS
UNLESS IT'S REALLY CLEAR ON THE
FACE OF THE STATUTE, THAT
CONGRESS INTENDEDLY THE LAW TO
APPLY TO CONDUCT THAT HAPPENED
OUTSIDE OF THE UNITED STATES,
THERE'S A PRESUMPTION AGAINST IT
APPLYING THAT WAY.
SO THE CHIEF JUSTICE EXAMINED
THE HISTORY OF THE STATUTE, THE
TEXT, AND THE PURPOSES, AND HE
SAID THERE WAS NO INDICATION
THAT IT SHOULD APPLY TO CONDUCT
THAT HAPPENED OUTSIDE OF THE
UNITED STATES.
>> Ifill: HAVE THERE BEEN
EXAMPLES IN THE PAST WHERE THIS
ACT HAS BEEN USED FOR CASES LIKE
THIS?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
IN FACT, IT HAS BECOME A MAJOR
TOOL OF HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS AND HUMAN RIGHTS
LAWYERS TO TRY TO BRING, IN MOST
RECENT YEARS, MULTINATIONAL
CORPORATIONS INTO COURT, WHEN,
AS THE CLAIM WAS HERE, THEY'VE
APPARENTLY WORKED OR ALLEGEDLY
WORKED IN CONCERT WITH FOREIGN
MILITARY OR FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS
THAT ENGAGED IN HUMAN RIGHTS
ABUSES.
AND IT'S BEEN-- THE LAW ITSELF
WASN'T USED MUCH UNTIL 1980, AND
THAT'S WHEN THE SUPREME COURT
ITSELF FOUND THAT IT-- IT UPHELD
THE LAW BEING USED BY PARAGUAYAN
CITIZENS, WHO SUED A PARGAYAN
MILITARY OFFICER FOR TORTURE
THAT OCCURRED IN PARAGUAY.
>> Ifill: SO IN NOT ALLOWING
IT TO BE USED THAT WAY THIS
TIME, THIS WAS A BLOW TO HUMAN
RIGHTS ACTIVISTS, I ASSUME?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AS I SAID, IT'S BECOME A MAJOR
TOOL TO BRING CORPORATIONS AND
OTHERS TO JUSTICE IN THE UNITED
STATES.
THE COURT SAID TODAY THAT IT
DOES NOT APPLY TO CONDUCT THAT
OCCURS ABROAD, OUTSIDE OF THE
UNITED STATES.
AND SO, HUMAN RIGHTS GROUPS SEE
THIS AS A SERIOUS BLOW.
BUT THEY DO SEE A RAY OF HOPE IN
SOME OF WHAT WAS WRITTEN IN THE
DIFFERENT OPINIONS TODAY.
>> Ifill: I WANT TO GET TO
THAT IN A MOMENT, BUT I'M
CURIOUS, UNLESS THIS IS THE
ANSWER TO THAT QUESTION, IS
THERE ANOTHER LEGAL PATH FOR
REDRESS.
IF YOU ARE A FOREIGN NATIONAL
AND YOU FEEL THAT SOMEHOW U.S.
CORPORATION HAS WRONGED YOU IN
ANOTHER COUNTRY, OTHER THAN THE
ALIEN TORT ACT, IS THERE ANOTHER
WAY?
>> THERE AREN'T MANY WAYS.
THERE IS A POSSIBILITY THAT THEY
MAY BE ABLE TO FIND SOMETHING
UNDER STATE LAWS IN THIS
COUNTRY.
BUT THIS-- THIS IS REALLY THE
MAJOR TOOL.
AND IT'S NOT JUST U.S.
CORPORATIONS.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS,
REALLY FOREIGN-BASED
CORPORATIONS THAT HAVE MAYBE A
SMALL PRESENCE IN THE UNITED
STATES.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE SAID IT'S NOT
GOING TO BE SUFFICIENT THAT YOU
JUST-- THAT A FOREIGN
CORPORATION HAS AN OFFICE IN THE
UNITED STATES FOR YOU TO BE ABLE
TO BRING THIS SUIT IN U.S.
COURT.
THIS PRESUMPTION IS A BIG BAR,
AND YOU HAVE TO SHOW THAT THERE
ARE SUFFICIENT CONTACTS WITH THE
UNITED STATES IN ORDER TO
OVERCOME THAT PRESUMPTION.
>> Ifill: I ASSUME WHAT YOU'RE
ALLUDED TO JUST NOW IS THE
UNUSUAL YIEWMENT FOR THE RULING,
YET NOT FOR THE SAME REASON.
>> ALL JUSTICES BELIEVED THIS
PARTICULAR CASE COULD NOT GO
FORWARD BECAUSE IT INVOLVED
FOREIGN PLAINTIFFS, FOREIGN
DEFENDANTS, AND CONDUCT THAT
HAPPENED ABROAD.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS AND FOUR
OTHER JUSTICES, JUSTICES
KENNEDY, SCALIA, ALITO, AND
THOMAS, ALL SAID THIS
PRESUMPTION AGAINST THE LAW
APPLYING OUTSIDE OF THE UNITED
STATES WAS THE RIGHT WAY TO
ANALYZE IT.
BUT JUSTICE BREYER, WRITING FOR
THE THREE REMAINING JUSTICES
THOUGHT THAT WAS NOT THE RIGHT
WAY TO ANALYZE THIS.
HE WOULD APPLY THE-- HE WOULD
SAY FEDERAL COURTS CAN HEAR
THESE CLAIMS, ONE, IF THE
DEFENDANT IN THE CASE IS AN
AMERICAN NATIONAL, IF THE
CONDUCT OCCURRED IN THE UNITED
STATES, BUT ALSO-- AND THIS IS
WHERE HE REALLY DIFFERED WITH
THE OTHER JUSTICES-- ALSO, IF
THERE WAS A DANGER THAT THE
UNITED STATES WAS GOING TO
BECOME A SAFE HARBOR FOR TORTURE
OR AS HE CALLED THEM THE COMMON
ENEMY OF MANKIND.
SO HE SAW IT AS A LITTLE
BROADER.
JUSTICE KENNEDY, WHO AGREED WITH
THE CHIEF JUSTICE'S ANALYSIS,
ALSO WROTE SEPARATELY TO SAY HE
THOUGHT THE OPINION WAS CAUTIOUS
AND LEFT OPEN MANY QUESTIONS AS
TO HOW TO REALLY INTERPRET THE
ALIEN TORT STATUTE, AND THERE
MIGHT BE A SMALL CATEGORY OF
CASES THAT THE COURT'S OPINION
TODAY DOES NOT COVER.
>> Ifill: MARCIA COYLE OF THE
NATIONAL LAW JOURNAL, THANK YOU
SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE, GWEN.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, A NEW
BOOK ARGUES THAT BLAMING ADDICTS
FOR THEIR ADDICTIONS COULD HURT
PEOPLE'S CHANCES FOR GETTING
CLEAN.
JUDY WOODRUFF HAS OUR
CONVERSATION.
>> Woodruff: DRUG ABUSE AND
SUBSTANCE ADDICTION COST THE
UNITED STATES NEARLY $600
BILLION A YEAR.
THEY KILL AT LEAST 320 AMERICANS
A DAY.
AND 90% OF ADDICTS START USING
DRUGS OR ALCOHOL BEFORE THE AGE
OF 18.
THAT IS DESPITE A LONG BATTLE
LAUNCHED BY PRESIDENT RICHARD
NIXON MORE THAN 40 YEARS AGO.
AND DECADES OF SUBSEQUENT
EFFORTS AND NUMEROUS PROGRAMS TO
TACKLE THE PROBLEM.
IN A NEW BOOK, WRITER AND
JOURNALIST DAVID SHEFF ARGUES
THAT MANY OF OUR FAILED EFFORTS
STEM FROM THE WRONG APPROACHES
AND A MISUNDERSTANDING OF THE
DISEASE.
HISOK, "CLEAN: OVERCOMING
ADDICTION AND ENDING AMERICA'S
GREATEST TRAGEDY,"IS  A
FOLLOW-UP TO HIS BESTSELLING
MEMOIR "BEAUTIFUL BOY" WHICH
DOCUMENTED HIS OWN SON'S
STRUGGLE WITH ADDICTION TO
HEROIN AND CRYSTAL METH.
DAVID SHEFF, WELCOME.
>> THANK YOU, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: SO YOU DID WRITE
THIS EARLIER BOOK ABOUT YOUR
SON.
WHY THE SECOND BOOK?
>> WELL, THE-- WHEN MY SON
BECAME ADDICTED, WE WERE
BLINDSIDED.
AND WE THOUGHT-- IT'S SUCH A
HORRIBLE, HORRIBLE EXPERIENCE.
MY SON WAS DYING.
HE WAS ON THE STREETS.
THIS WAS THIS GREAT KID WHO EVER
PARENT CAN RELATE TO.
HE WAS THIS GREAT STUDENT, THIS
ATHLETE.
AND SUDDENLY HE WAS NOT ONLY
SMOKING SOME POT-- WHICH IS
PRETTY COMMON-- AND DRINKING,
BUT BEFORE HE KNEW IT HE WAS ST.
HE WAS BREAKING INTO OUR HOUSE.
SO SOMETHING HAD HAPPENED, AND
IT WAS BAFFLING.
WE HAD NO IDEA WHAT TO DO AND WS
10 YEARS HOW TO FIGURE OUT HOW
TO HELP HIM WITH THIS PROBLEM
AND I REALIZED THE SYSTEM WAS A
MESS.
>> Woodruff: YOU SAY IN THE
BOOK ONE IN EVERY 12 AMERICANS
OVER THE AGE OF 12 IS ADDICTED.
THAT IS ASTONISHING.
AND YET WE'RE NOT HEARING ABOUT
DRUG ADDICTION THAT MUCH ANY
MORE.
AND YOU SIGH THE APPROACH THAT
THIS COUNTRY IS TAKE IS ALL
WRONG.
EXPLAIN.
>> IT IS ALL WRONG.
PART OF THE REASON-- YOU'RE
RIGHT, WE DON'T TALK ABOUT IT
AND WE DON'T ACKNOWLEDGE IT, AND
PART OF THE REASON IS BECAUSE
PEOPLE WITH THIS DISEASE ARE
JUDGED AND THEY'RE BLAMED, AND
IT'S SEEN AS A MORAL FAILING.
IT'S SEEN AS A CHOICE.
IF YOU'RE HAVING PROBLEMS IN
YOUR LIFE BECAUSE YOU'RE USING
DRUGS OR YOU'RE DRINKING, STOP.
WELL, PEOPLE WHO ARE ADDICTED
WOULD STOP IF THEY COULD.
SO THEY HIDE.
THERE'S THIS ENORMOUS SHAME
SHAIM AND THIS GUILT AND THIS
BLAME AROUND THIS PROBLEM THAT
DOESN'T EXIST WITH ANY OTHER
DISEASE.
WE DON'T TALK ABOUT IT.
PART OF THE REASON IS THAT WE
LOOK AT THIS, AND AS A CULTURE
AND AS A SOCIETY, WE TREAT IT AS
A CRIMINAL PROBLEM.
AS IT'S A PROBLEM ABOUT MORALS.
THERE'S A STIGMA AROUND IT.
IN FACT, IT'S A HEALTH PROBLEM,
AND IT'S A HEALTH CRISIS GROOD
YOU TALK ABOUT THE APPROACH
THAT'S NEEDED, THAT IT NEEDS TO
BE AN EVIDENCE-BASED APPROACH,
AND SO MUCH OF WHAT WE'RE
FAMILIAR WITH, PROGRAMS LIKE AA,
ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS, NARCOTICS
ANONYMOUS, AND YOU SAY THEY HELP
SOME ADDICTS BUT THEY DON'T HELP
MANY OTHERS.
>> ONE OF THE BIG PROBLEMS WITH
THE TREATMENT SYSTEM IS NOT THAT
A.A. IS AVAILABLE AND PREVALENT.
IT SAVES THE LIVES OF MANY
PEOPLE.
ONE OF MY DEAREST FRIEND IS
ALIVE ONLYAU
BUT IT DOESN'T HELP A LOT OF
PEOPLE.
AND EVERYONE IS DIFFERENT, AND
EVERYONE NEEDS DIFFERENT KINDS
OF TREATMENTS.
AND SO WHAT HAPPENS NOW IS SINCE
MOST OF THE REHABS IN AMERICA
ARE BASED ON THIS ONE PARADIGM,
PEOPLE GO INTO TREATMENT IT,
DOESN'T WORK FOR THEM.
THEY ARE BLAMED FOR IT.
THEY'RE KICKED OUT.
THEY GO BACK AND THEY RELAPSE.
THEY HAVE THIS-- IT'S A
SELF-FULFILLING PROSSEE.
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO GET WELL.
THEY WON'T GET TREATED, THEY USE
MORE DRUGS, AND IT'S A CYCLE
THAT ENDS UP KILLING AS YOU SAID
320 PEOPLE A DAY.
>> Woodruff: YOU DO MAKE A
POINT AND YOU JUST SAID IT AGAIN
A COUPLE OF TIMES THAT ADDICTION
IS NOT A MORAL FAILING OR A
SHORTCOMING.
THERE ARE REVIEWERS OF YOUR BOOK
WHO SAY THAT YOU-- THAT-- THAT
THERE SHOULD BE SOME WEIGHT PUT
ON THIS ARGUMENT THAT PEOPLE
MAKE A CHOICE.
WHEN THEY FIRST GO TURN TO
DRUGS, TURN TO ALCOHOL, THEY'RE
MAKING THAT CHOICE, AND,
THEREFORE, THEY BEAR SOME
RESPONSIBILITY FOR WHAT'S
HAPPENED.
>> I TOTALLY GET THAT.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT IS THINK
ABOUT 10 KIDS WHO GO OUT AFTER
SCHOOL AND THEY GO TO THE
PLAYGROUND, OR WHEREVER THEY GO,
AND THEY ALL SMOKE A JOINT.
ONE OF THOSE KIDS IS GOING TO
BECOME ADDICTED.
SO ALL OF THOSE KIDS MADE THAT
CHOICE.
THAT ONE KID DID NOT MAKE THE
CHOICE TO BECOME ADDICTED.
THE REASON HE BECOMES ADDICTED
IS BECAUSE HIS BRAIN IS
DIFFERENT.
HIS NEUROLOGICAL SYSTEM IS
IT RESPONDS TO DRUGS, IT DOESN'T
DIFFERENT.
PROCESS THEM THE SAME AS
IT RESPONDS TO DRUGS, IT DOESN'T
EVERYBODY ELSE.
PROCESS THEM THE SAME AS
SO THAT'S NOT A CHOICE.
EVERYBODY ELSE.
AND THAT'S THE PROBLEM IS WE
SO THAT'S NOT A CHOICE.
LOOK AT-- MANY OF US LOOK AT IT
AND THAT'S THE PROBLEM IS WE
AS A CHOICE, AND, THEREFORE, WE
LOOK AT-- MANY OF US LOOK AT IT
BLAME PEOPLE FOR BECOMING
AS A CHOICE, AND, THEREFORE, WE
ADDICTED AND WE BLAME THEM WHEN
BLAME PEOPLE FOR BECOMING
THEY DON'T GET WELL.
ADDICTED AND WE BLAME THEM WHEN
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU SAY
THEY DON'T GET WELL.
TO INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE AN
>> Woodruff: WHAT DO YOU SAY
ADDICTION PROBLEM OR THEIR LOVED
TO INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE AN
ONES, THEIR FAMILY BHOBZ WHILE
ADDICTION PROBLEM OR THEIR LOVED
WE'RE WAITING FOR THE SYSTEM TO
ONES, THEIR FAMILY BHOBZ WHILE
GET BETTER, TO TREAT THEM, WHAT
WE'RE WAITING FOR THE SYSTEM TO
DO THEY DO NOW?
GET BETTER, TO TREAT THEM, WHAT
WHERE DO THEY TURN?
DO THEY DO NOW?
>> WELL, IT'S HARD.
WHERE DO THEY TURN?
FIRST OF ALL, THE FIRST THING I
>> WELL, IT'S HARD.
TELL PEOPLE THAT ARE GOING
FIRST OF ALL, THE FIRST THING I
THROUGH THIS IS TO GET SUPPORT.
TELL PEOPLE THAT ARE GOING
JUST-- GLOOTD WHERE?
THROUGH THIS IS TO GET SUPPORT.
>> WELL FYOU'RE A PARENT THERE
JUST-- GLOOTD WHERE?
IS A 1212-STEP ORGANIZATION,
>> WELL FYOU'RE A PARENT THERE
ALANON, AND MY WIFE AND I WERE
IS A 1212-STEP ORGANIZATION,
IN FAMILY THERAPY.
ALANON, AND MY WIFE AND I WERE
IF YOU NEED TREATMENT FOR
IN FAMILY THERAPY.
SOMEBODY BECAUSE THE SYSTEM IS
IF YOU NEED TREATMENT FOR
IN SUCH DISREAL ESTATE, THE ONE
SOMEBODY BECAUSE THE SYSTEM IS
PLAY TO START, IF YOU HAVE
IN SUCH DISREAL ESTATE, THE ONE
CANCER, YOU HAVE HEART DISEASE,
PLAY TO START, IF YOU HAVE
YOU KNOW WHERE TO START.
CANCER, YOU HAVE HEART DISEASE,
YOU GO TO A DOCTOR.
YOU KNOW WHERE TO START.
THERE ARE DOCTORS TRAINED IN
YOU GO TO A DOCTOR.
ADDICTION MEDICINE.
THERE ARE DOCTORS TRAINED IN
THAT'S WHERE YOU HAVE TO GO.
ADDICTION MEDICINE.
THERE'S A LISTING ON THE WEB AT
THAT'S WHERE YOU HAVE TO GO.
THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
THERE'S A LISTING ON THE WEB AT
ADDICTION MEDICINE.
THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF
THAT'S WHERE GU.
ADDICTION MEDICINE.
YOU GET ASSESSED, FIND OUT IS
THAT'S WHERE GU.
THERE A PROBLEM?
YOU GET ASSESSED, FIND OUT IS
HOW SERIOUS IS THE PROBLEM.
THERE A PROBLEM?
WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT.
HOW SERIOUS IS THE PROBLEM.
>> Woodruff: CALL A DOCTOR, GO
WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT.
TO THE WEB, GET INFORMATION, GET
>> Woodruff: CALL A DOCTOR, GO
HELP.
TO THE WEB, GET INFORMATION, GET
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
HELP.
>> Woodruff: REACH OUT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> IT'S A DISEASE.
>> Woodruff: REACH OUT.
ONCE WE UNDERSTAND THAT THIS IS
>> IT'S A DISEASE.
A DISEASE, IT'S A BRAIN DISEASE,
ONCE WE UNDERSTAND THAT THIS IS
THEN WE HAVE-- WE KNOW WHAT TO
A DISEASE, IT'S A BRAIN DISEASE,
DO.
THEN WE HAVE-- WE KNOW WHAT TO
WHEN YOU'RE SICK, YOU CALL THE
DO.
DOCTOR.
WHEN YOU'RE SICK, YOU CALL THE
>> Woodruff: DAVID SHEFF,
DOCTOR.
AUTHOR OF THE BOOK "CLEAN:
>> Woodruff: DAVID SHEFF,
OVERCOMING ADDICTION AND ENDING
AUTHOR OF THE BOOK "CLEAN:
AMERICA'S GREATEST TRAGEDY."
OVERCOMING ADDICTION AND ENDING
THANK YOU.
AMERICA'S GREATEST TRAGEDY."
>> JUDY, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE SENATE REJECTED A BIPARTISAN
PROPOSAL TO IMPOSE BACKGROUND
CHECKS ON SOME GUN BUYERS,
DEALING A BLOW TO THE WHITE
HOUSE AND TO GUN CONTROL
ADVOCATES.
CONFUSION ERUPTED IN BOSTON OVER
CLAIMS THAT INVESTIGATORS HAD
ARRESTED A SUSPECT IN MONDAY'S
BOMBINGS.
THE F.B.I. DENIED IT AND
CRITICIZED INACCURATE REPORTING.
AND POLICE IN WASHINGTON AND
AROUND THE COUNTRY WERE KEPT
BUSY CHECKING SUSPICIOUS LETTERS
AND PACKAGES SENT TO SENATORS
AND THE PRESIDENT.
>> Brown: ONLINE, WE EXPLORE THE
SCIENCE BEHIND THE VISUAL
EFFECTS IN BLOCKBUSTER FILMS.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: AN ACADEMY-AWARD
WINNING VISUAL EFFECTS ARTIST
EXPLAINS HOW HE HELPED PIONEER A
TECHNIQUE TO DIFFUSE LIGHT
THROUGH ANIMATED SKIN, WHICH HAS
BROUGHT CHARACTERS TO LIFE IN
FILMS SUCH A"AVAS TAR," "KING
KONG" AND "LORD OF THE RINGS."
AND ON MAKING SENSE, TWO SENIOR
ENTREPRENEURS GIVE THEIR TOP
TIPS FOR STARTING A BUSINESS
LATER IN LIFE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
GWEN?
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, WE'LL BRING YOU THE
PRAYER SERVICE FOR THE VICTIMS
IN BOSTON.
I'M GWEN IFILL
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.